Dairy
NZ.
And we can see you there,
David.
Um,
we just-- oh, there we go. Welcome to the select committee this
morning. You have twenty minutes with us.
Um, do take your submission as read.
I know it's a, a pretty weighty submission here, but, we'll hand
it over to you to talk us through the main points, and then we'll open up for
questions.
Kia ora koutou. Uh, just making sure you can see Richard McIntyre there as well,
our board member.
Uh, no, we can't see Richard at this point.
So-
He's
in it.
Um, if we-- oh, there we go. We can just see him pop through
now. Welcome, Richard.
Hey, thank you very much for having us.
Um, so tena koutou katoa, chair and members of the Environment Select
Committee. I'm Richard McIntyre, and I'm a dairy farmer and farmer-elected
director of Dairy NZ.
With me today is David Cooper, who you've just talked to before.
He's our principal policy advisor.
Dairy NZ is the industry good organization representing all New
Zealand, all New Zealand dairy farmers.
We are funded by a levy on milk solids and exist to help farmers build
profitable, sustainable, resilient businesses through
extension, advocacy, science and
research. Dairy is one of New Zealand's largest export
earners, with twenty-seven billion dollars in export earnings
in the year to June 2025, representing
roughly one in every four export dollars.
The sector directly employs around twenty-four thousand people,
increasing to an estimated fifty-five thousand people if you include
processing and farm support services.
As a farmer, I've seen firsthand how the sector has stepped
up. Over the last decade, dairy farmers have widely adopted
practices like waterway fencing, improved effluent management,
nutrient budgeting and farm environment plans through the Sustainable
Dairy and Water Accord and Dairy Tomorrow initiatives.
Today, more than ninety-eight percent of significant waterways on dairy farms are
fenced, so that's over twenty-four thousand kilometers, and over eighty-four
percent of farms operate under industry-led
farm environment plans.
Recent research estimates that those dairy farms who have
implemented industry-driven good farming practices have seen nitrogen
losses drop by twenty percent and phosphorus losses drop by
fourteen percent between 2015 and 2023.
Dairy NZ supports resource management reform and the government's goal of
enabling primary sector growth while maintaining or improving environmental
outcomes. These goals are
compatible. However, as drafted, the bill falls
short of delivering on ministerial intent.
Our submission provides detailed redrafting that aligns with the structure of the
bills. Because many amendments are
interconnected, they should be considered as a package of
changes. We have been working across the primary
sector to ensure alignment. I'll now pass to David to
outline our priority changes.
Kia ora koutou. Uh, so primary industries underpin New Zealand's social and
economic well-being, as Richard has said, and rely on access to natural
resources. The bills must explicitly support sustainable resource
use within environmental limits.
So we've proposed two key amendments to the goals of the Natural Environment Bill.
First is explicit recognition of primary production as a nationally significant
activity. Second is a clear statement enabling resource
use, responsible resource use, subject to clauses
11B and 11C of the goals. Our concern is in the absence
of this recognition, the Act will be implemented in a way that risks placing too
little weight on the benefits of agriculture or resource use as the
Act is applied, imposing a hierarchy.
Clause 11B of the goals requires safeguard, safeguarding the life-supporting
capacity of air, water, soil and ecosystems, and Clause
11C requires protection of human health.
The goals need an explicit recognition of the importance of resource use and the
importance of primary production.
Without this recognition, if the goals were applied to the extent we are
concerned, the implications would be highly detrimental to the future of
agriculture and, rural and the national communities.
We also propose additional guiding principles to better bridge the gap
between high-level policy intent and the practical
implementation. These additional principles act as
guardrails to ensure the system delivers the government's intended
outcomes. They would build on the existing principles by
embedding an enable where possible approach while being subject to
meeting environmental goals. Dairy NZ
supports setting limits on natural resource use.
For fresh water, it is essential to amend the NEB,
to ensure there is a clear distinction between human and ecosystem health
outcomes. That is, national human health limits with
clear numerical thresholds, regional environmental
limits that may also be numerical, but equally allow for
qualitative direction of travel approaches where numerical limits are not
reliable. Providing for a qualitative approach is
essential when setting regional environmental limits.
Catchments are complex natural environments.
We don't yet have the tools to translate rigid catchment-level
numerical limits into accurate evidence-based requirements at the
farm scale. This creates a false sense of
precision and risks ineffective or disproportionate
regulation. A more flexible qualitative framework would better
support and deliver practical ecosystem health outcomes,
outcomes. The level at which numerical limits are set
can fundamentally determine where-- whether farming can continue as a
catchmentAs an example, the Maungawhenuku catchment in Tukituki
in Hawke's Bay, modeling of nitrate shows that to get above what
has been regarded as the national bottom line, that is the bottom of C band, you
would need to convert all dairy land around three th-- three thousand hectares
plus approximately twenty thousand hectares of sheep and beef to
forestry. This would reduce sheep and beef from seventy-nine
percent of the catchment to around twenty percent of the catchment.
If you wanted to be more ambitious and aim for the next band, B band, you would
need to remove all pastoral agriculture, and even then the catchment
would still not reach B band minimum bottom lines.
These results illustrate that pursuing B band outcomes in these catchments would
require land use change. The required reduction in diffuse
nutrient losses would be far beyond what is feasible through on-farm
practice improvements or mitigation.
This is on an isolated case highlighting the need for careful proportionate limit
setting to avoid disproportionate land use impacts.
When setting limits, understanding these potential costs is critical, but the bill
does not require that. We think that leaves existing gearing and other foreign
production highly vuller-- vulnerable.
So we recommend that legislation, A, allows for qualitative limits when
numerical limits are inappropriate, B, requires consideration
of current water quality and land use patterns, and C, requires
transparent justification reports with cost benefit and risk
asse-assessments to both inform commu-- regulators and also
enable for that, informed community engagement on trade-offs and what
we're trying to achieve.
So these changes will guide workable secondary legislation
and avoid repeating the unachievable
limits.
Fantastic. So farm plans are already being used to make decisions in the
dairy sector. On the farms we are responsible for,
the plan helps us identify where the key risks are and guides our actions and
investment to the areas that will make the biggest difference in terms of reducing
environmental footprint. That's true across the sector, with
farmers using farm plans as a tool for consistent improvement
in ways that fit their land and systems.
The NEB provides an opportunity to build on farm plans as an
effective tool. Dairy farmers wanna see freshwater farm plans
triggering permitted activity status where those activities are best
managed through a freshwater farm plan.
As drafted, it is not clear they replace existing rules.
In summary, we are seeking amendments to ensure certified and
auditable freshwater farm plans are the primary tool for managing
on-farm environmental risk. Limit the ability to
create duplicate rules and regulations.
If the legislation recognizes farm plans as a core
mechanism, we get a system that is practical, targeted
and effective. This, this can embed continuous improvement
rather than layering on added impractical and unnecessary
cost. I'll pass to David now to discuss permitted activities.
And we support the government's aim of reducing unnecessary consents and increasing
permitted activities. As drafted, the bills, we do not believe achieve
this. Permitted activities are an efficient way to manage low impact
anticipated farm activities supported by freshwater farm plans, national
standards, and targeted regulations or actions where needed.
If these tools can ensure activities do not have a significant impact on the
ability to meet limits, and in fact, they can ensure progress is made
towards limits that are already exceeded, they should be permitted.
Yet under the current drafting, even routine activities such as grazing or track
maintenance would require consent in catchments that are considered to be in breach
of limits. So that is highly inefficient and co-contrary to
the government's intent. To amend this, we're seeking
removal of mandatory registration permitted activities.
Although, registration should be available, but not as a
default. Clear permitted activity pathways, including
catchments at or near limits, provided the package of regulations will
result in improvement over
time. Permitted activities
ex-- supported by what is a, a bit of an intervention
framework in clauses sixty to sixty-seven.
Again, we believe this drafting requires refinement.
Action plans appear intended to draw on existing catchment and community-led
work. Yet as drafted, they primarily
function as regulatory tools. So we're seeking amendments to ensure
action plans remain collaborative, non-regulatory mechanisms that
communities can meaningfully shape and own.
Farmers want the efforts to be recognized before being, before more
stringent interventions imposed, but they do not want, want to
become de facto regulators, through action plans.
Those clauses also in-introduce, what we're calling an intervention
sequencing, where the framework also
requires... The framework requires decision-makers to consider lower
costs, enabling regulatory and non-regulatory options before escalating to
more stringent measures. The sequencing is essential
to ensure that the system u-uses the least cost, most
eff-effectively tools first, as the first
levers before regulators start pulling those more stringent
levers. Uh, back to you, Richard.
Right. So in closing, the bill requires a package of integrated amendments to
deliver a durable system that provides regulatory certainty for
primary production while achieving better economic, social and
environmental outcomes for all New Zealanders.
These integrated changes will deliver the government's intent
for a system that enables sustainable primary production while achieving
positive environmental outcomes.
Enduring legislation is essential.
There needs to be a provision for use of natural resources in a sustainable
manner. Farmers have faced repeated shifts in national
direction, triggering costly and contentious processes that
have consumed tens, possibly hundreds of millions of dollars.
Resources that would have been far better invested in practical environmental
action.Dairy NZ is committed to constructive engagement
through the select committee process
and on secondary legislation. We remain available to workshop
drafting and implementation details.
Thank you, and we welcome questions.
Look, thanks Richard and David for those insights,
and feedback and that submission.
Look, I'm gonna give the first question to our select committee dairy
farmer, Grant
McCollum.
Yeah, g'day team. Um, morning. Uh, the just...
I, I, I noticed with interest you, in the, uh...
There's a lot of good stuff in here, good submission, thank you.
Uh, in the spatial planning area, you, you, you, you
expressed some concerns about the fact that, that's not been de- the
whole,
agricultural land use has, is, is not been dealt with very well.
And then also following up with that, you also highlight evaluation
reports do not require specific consideration costs and benefits.
Would you care to elaborate on those two points, please?
Yeah, sure. Look, I'll pass this one on to David. Thanks, Grant.
Yeah. I should say, straight up that spatial plans are really useful.
We really support those, strategic plans forward, defining where things
can occur. Our concern is that spatial plans will become
stringent mechanisms for farming and what we're saying that the
limits on farming should be driven through the natural environment of those
limits, not directly through or primarily,
primarily through spatial plans so that, you know,
where farming can occur and the, the, regulations they're facing should sit
within the national environment bill.
Yep.
Um, in terms of the, cost-benefit analysis, I think
it's, that's a theme running right throughout.
So, we've got concerns where, f-
regulators impose more stringent,
limitations, and there's not sufficient cost-benefit
analysis. What we're really looking for is something that can inform
that, that engagement with communities, tangata whenua and affected
communities where, you know, there's that iterative conversation,
"These are the limits we wanna achieve.
This is the impact it's gonna have on your economy." "Okay, let's have a look at
those limits and, and how we go about it."
Th- thanks team.
Thank you. Look, we'll now go to Lan
Pham.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up on your comments around the action
plans.
Mm.
And you talk about them as a highly regulatory
tool, and that you would like them to l-
there be, to be more limits on direction-setting and remove the consenting
influence of action plans and reduce the regulatory
focus. Um, my understanding of action
plans, and perhaps I'm misinterpreting this, is that
councils actually won't be able to use regulatory tools
at all until they're satisfied that
voluntary measures, won't
actually cut it in terms of the direction that the community's
trying to get to. Can you clarify your understanding
of the action plans?
I'll pass this one on to David again.
Um, thanks, Lan.
Yeah, certainly. So as, as drafted, that's, that's the intent there.
It seems to be the intent talking to officials.
So you go through those, stages, you pull
additional levers as, as the issues, arise.
So
if you look at the drafting of those clauses, those action plans as currently
drafted allow, regulators to start calling in consents.
They allow regulators to start doing a, a whole heap of things that
we don't consider to be that sort of community-based discussion around what
should and shouldn't occur. Now, those levers might be appropriate to
pull later down the track, but we just really wanna make sure that those
action plan discussions are an informed commun- discussion with
community, around what may o- may occur, what may not
occur. Um, you know, is that combination of regulatory and non-regulatory if it's
more a result. Um, so basically taking existing catchment plans,
building upon that and doing that before we step, further down that
regulatory track. So it's a specific drafting and we've proposed,
specific redrafting to address what we're, we're talking about or what we're
seeking.
Thank you. Uh, now we'll go to Steve Abel.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for the, submission,
substantive submission. I, I, I've got a question for you.
You're, you're very
keen on the only sort of, or the
primary means to be farm plan based.
Um, and yet you recognize that we have to
look at the whole catchment. No disagreement there with looking at the whole
catchment. And then you go on to make a very sound case for why
it's very difficult to measure diffusely charged contaminants with any
meaningful accuracy at the property scale.
Um, and you point out on page 12 that research clearly indicates there are
insufficient tools to model diffuse contaminant loss at property scale.
Doesn't that betray the problem that we face that
we need to treat, the huge volume of nutrients
going into a catchment, and
impacting fresh water
as a thing that must be restricted at the catchment
level?
Because it may be that one property in that catchment is responsible for
the overwhelming s- main source of nutrient
loss. So
I, I feel like you can't have it both ways,
and I just wonder if you can respond to that.
It's all very well for us to have,
non-regulatory consensual buy-in by catchment groups.
Fantastic. But at some point, isn't it the duty of the regulator to
say, "There is clearly too much nutri- nutrient going into this catchment, and
we have to cap the volume going in"?
So, so just to clarify, Steve, you're talking about the
nutrients effectively entering waterways, or are you talking about going into the
catchment, in terms of fertilizer, et cetera, regardless
Yeah. Well, I mean, like, for it to get to the waterway, it has to have come in at
the top via urine and fertilizer.
Well, so
to my mind, it doesn't overly matter how much comes in, it's where it goes.
Because plenty of nutrients actually exit the, exit the farm in
terms of product, you know, animal product in terms of milk and meat and the
likes, right? And then it's... So it's what, what happens with those nutrients as
they flow down the line. And the best way to resolve that is through
the likes of freshwater farm plans, which basically impact upon the decisions
that farmers do make, in terms of how they farm and
what mitigation processes they put in place.
You know, wetlands are, are great examples, we've got a few on our farm, in order
to limit, nitrogen and phosphorus from actually entering the, the waterway
and flowing out of our farm. So-
Yeah, that's all, that's all great, but you, you point out in your submission, and
I agree with this, that it's very difficult to work
out how much is diffusely discha- discharged at the farm
level. So, like, that's what I'm pointing out, is the contradiction
and the idea that we rely on the farm plan to solve the problem, and
we just have... we don't have the mechanisms, or the means, or the
tools to actually know how much nutrient is escaping.
It's, it's a... there's a lot of guesswork and ad hocery in that.
And that means until we've got those tools, we need
to protect the whole catchment with the knowledge that if you put in a whole lot of
nutrients, they've gotta go somewhere.
I, I, I... Sorry, if you wouldn't mind, I'll rephrase that as that catchment to
scale discussion around actions and outcomes.
So there is complexity in these, in these c- catchments, yet
there will be some action needed beyond freshwater farm
plans, and it might be that further regulations, it might be that you take
catchment scale approach, it might be that all farmers, you know,
consider where they might put wetlands and some of those critical sort of leaching
areas. So yeah, I, I would reframe it as actions.
And I'd, I'd... rather than trying to hit those numerical
numbers that may or may not be delivering those outcomes, constant
monitoring and iteration of the outcomes.
Are there enough fish in the sea, in the water?
Um, do, do we have enough shading in this stream here?
Do we do some more planting? Uh, so focused on actions, and that's
also a behavioral sort of driver as well.
Farmers sitting together talking about what they might do to reduce,
nutrient levels to deli- deliver on those outcomes.
That really works based on what we've seen.
So it's, yeah, more a catchment scale outcomes focus that will translate down
to the farm level, but it's about act- actions, that deliver
on those outcomes.
Look, thank you very much, Richard and David. We have met time this morning.
Uh, we appreciate your, very thorough submission and, and
the feedback that you're providing, very valuable information for
the committee. So thank you very much.
Yeah.
Thank you very much for y- your
time.
Uh, so we now move on to our next submitter, who
we are waiting, Dugald
McTavish.
Uh, Dugald actually just needs to accept his
promotion, by the committee to a
panelist. Um, just need to press that
invitation when it pops up on your
screen,
as we can't bring you through as a
submitter until you accept that
invitation.
There we go. We can see you, Dugald.
Uh, we just,
we...
Oh. Uh, Dugald, we can
see you popping up there. If you just wanna pop your video on and your
audio.
Good.
There we go. We've got your audio. If you just want to pop on your video so we can
see you.
Oh, there we go, Dugald. Welcome to the Select Committee this morning.
You've got 10 minutes with us, so, in the essence of time, we'll hand it over
to you to talk us through your
submission.
Need to
gallery. Speaking.
Okay, you're small. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Yeah. Yeah. Sorry, you're on a small screen, but, it's technology, it's a
bit... Yeah. All right. We'll get on with it. Thank you very much.
Um, so good morning, Madam Chair, members of the Select
Committee. Um, first, if you wouldn't mind, I'd like to
refer to my submission. So if you could, you
could bring it up, that would be good.
Um, okay, I'll fire into it. Earlier in the two thou- in
the 2000s, people like Alan Mark,
Brian Turner, Graham Sydney, Anton Oliver,
and some of us in North Otago were battling to protect
rivers from major generation developments in the Clutha
and Waitaki catchments. We realized we might win
the odd battle, but we're losing the war and would not win
it without a shift in our collective attitude to the
environment. I see the same flawed
mindset behind these bills, so this submission attempts to
address it. However, there
has been no clause-by-clause
analysis-Instead, I attended two
EDS, webinars, noted their
concerns, and then asked Copilot three
questions. First, what are the key
policy and resource implications when we
presuppose that virtually any growth is
good? This produced table one in my s-
submission on page two, i.e. the status
quo. Second, what are the implications
when we presuppose that overshoot and resource limits
are now the reality? This produced table two
in my submission on page three. Third,
using the evaluation fa- framework on page
four, in a world of overshoot and limits,
how well and how reliably would the proposed bills
deliver useful outcomes? From the
table three findings, key weaknesses are
synthesised and an action list for the bills is
developed on page six.
My submission is essentially the value of legislation
depends on how accurately its assumptions
reflect real-world context. And
secondly, our current growth-and-development-first
economic framing is wrong and must shift
towards resilience and sufficiency, including
fair resource sharing. These
bills are presented as a sincere attempt to
manage our environment, when in fact their provisions
effectively loosen existing law to
streamline development, very similar to the
fast-track legislation. Such development
assumes resources, technology, and
substitution will continue to support an upward
economic trajectory indefinitely.
But if we consider the atmosphere's limited capacity to absorb
greenhouse gas
and the rising risk of irreversible warming, the assumption
is clearly false. It is false also because
humanity's impact now overshoots Earth's carrying capacity
by a factor of one point eight, up from one
planet in nineteen eighty. Given this and the
close relationship between GDP and
environmental impact, why would we,
why would we prioritize accelerating
growth? The alternative
is to heed
the evidence that we are hitting environmental limits
and, as a priority, legislate to preserve and restore
ecological integrity rather than simply grow.
The Natural Environment Bill includes a goal to enable
and use-- to enable the use and development of
natural resources within environmental
limits, but the emphasis remains on use and
development when assumptions about true limits are
shaped by ideology.
The action list on page six is intended for a
resource-constrained world and synthesizes the, the
bills as a whole. Given their length,
few submissions-- submitters could base
recommendations on such comprehensive
analysis, certainly not me.
And
while that action list was developed with the
assistance of AI, it aligns with my
personal experience of how the bills could be
improved and would not have been possible without it.
So faithfully implementing the action plan in a
dedicated part of the NEB
would go a long way to quickly align the bills
with what science tells us is coming and with the
growing geopolitical
uncertainties. Some may argue it
is too late
in the process for such fundamental changes.
But if the underlying assumptions are wrong,
then without ground-truthing them, much bad
policy will remain uncorrected. In my
experience, most of us are uneasy about an
endless growth-and-development-first
agenda, but keep the concern at
arm's length, hoping solutions will emerge
without the need for proactive change, despite evidence to the
contrary. MPs bring party
policy, but surely have a greater
responsibility to ensure a safe future for their
children. If you agree
we must plan to live within limits, please
ensure these bills deliver on that
need. Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak to
you.
Thank you very much, Dugald. Uh, we have a question from
Lann Pham.
Tēnā koe, Dugald. Good to see you. Um,
thanks for your submission. My question is around,
picking up on, I guess, the high
level of what you're asking for, for in terms
of, advocating for future
generations and for very clear limits that
actually set, you know, current and future
generations actually, not just future generations up for the future.
Um, some submitters have raised that they'd like
explicit recognition, for example-
Of the needs of future generations, and also the need
for, climate mitigation and climate
emissions reductions to be built into these two
bills. Do you have any thoughts for the
committee on that
proposal?
Um, yeah. Yeah. I, I,
I would agree with those proposals.
I mean, I think they make good sense.
And I think that, focusing on climate
is quite a good way of,
getting to the deeper problems which, which, which I
think is that more general philosophical position,
that it's good to grow, almost
anything, you know,
because it employs people and it, and it keeps the
economy stable and those sorts of things, you know.
Um, so but it's, it's almost too
difficult to kind of deal with that
b- broadly, but if you focus on climate change and we've got to reduce emissions
and there's that close relationship between GDP,
a- and emissions and our negative impacts,
then you automatically deal with a lot of other
problems, you know? You, you start...
I mean, if you reduce emissions by 25%, you probably knock back the
economy by 50%, and of that order, you
know, and that's kind of the thing we gotta do, you know?
So, so I think, I think it's a good lever,
yeah. Hope that answers it.
Thank you.
And now we'll go to Grant McCallum.
I noticed one of your recommendations is to add an explicit sufficiency objective
and basic provisioning duty. How do you sort of, how do you make that
work when, in, in, in light of the fact when people propose solar
farms, wind farms, hydro, you know, all renewable ele- electricity
for example sources, we get a lot, tend to get a lot of objections to that.
How do you sort of marry those two goals, marry those, marry those things
together?
So what are the two things we're marrying?
Well, the, the objection to building more renewable energy
versus-
Yeah
... when you talk about explicit sufficiency objective for the
country.
Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you always
have a NIMBY thing, don't you? And,
yeah,
I think of the Hayes Wind Farm for instance, you know, that was proposed by
Meridian a few years ago. You, you had that conflict between,
landscape and, and the reality that we need
new, you know, renewables.
Um,
again, I, I, I, I think, I think the,
the
the challenge is to sell the overriding
importance of, you know, doing the likes of reducing
emissions and reducing our demands on resources and so forth.
So
I think it's up to the government. I, I kind of
feel almost like, I'd like to run a course,
well, not just me, but, it would be good if there was
a kind of science course or something that all politicians
did that kind of helped them to understand that
this is such a serious thing, you know, and if we don't get it right,
then,
and then they can bring the community along, so.
Mm. Yeah. Well, thanks very much.
Look, thank you very much, Dugald.
Yes, no, we're very aware of how significant, this legislation
is, so, we appreciate your submission today, and your feedback on
using AI, which I'm sure many of us can
relate to as well. So, yeah, appreciate your
time.
Yeah. Well, thank you very much. You always get a phone call, don't you, at the
wrong minute.
Yeah.
Um, yeah, so, uh-
Thank, thank you
... yeah. All right. Thank you very much, and good luck to you all.
It's a real challenge, this, so, yeah, all the best.
Thank you.
Righto.
Um, so now we welcome through our next submitter, Linda
Conning.
And we can see you there, Linda. Just popped
up.
Well, welcome, Linda, to the select committee this morning.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us, to take your
submission as read, but we look forward to hearing the main points, and it looks
like you have a lot of experience in, in RMA, so we look forward to hearing from
you. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair, and, mōrena
tātou to, to you all, and thank you for inviting me to speak.
I do appreciate that. We do need a system that's not a
political football, that protects the environment and meets
people's rights and needs, and there's no simple fix to
this, but, I'll just give you a short list of some
of them. Um, the takings regime should be deleted, the
matters of national importance and water conservation orders under the RMA
should be retained. Environmental limits need to
ma- made clear and enforceable, and that, and, and
including the registration of some permitted activities.
Um, I think this would help councils hugely to manage
environmental effects. Minimize effects of intensive
housing, and provide for urban green spaces, trees, and
biodiversity.Third party rights for standing and appeal rights should
be reinstated. The system for affected parties need fixing,
resource levies retained, and much more.
Now there's a lot of detail of individual provisions in my written
submissions, and-- but my submission today is focused on
some matters I've got particular experience of and covers
both bills. So, I'm sorry you won't really be able to follow
me by looking at my written submissions.
So I'm st-starting with the goals and purposes of the
bills. The pur-purposes include the enjoyment of
land and enhancement of the national-- natural environment.
But neither bill actually provides for those
purposes of enjoyment and enhancement, nor the goals to
be achieved. For example, in the planning bill,
well-functioning u-urban areas cannot be achieved
if you've got no minimum dwelling size, and with
amenity values out of scope, there's no way to provide for those
goals. In the NEB, enabling use within
limits and no net loss of biodiversity are unifi--
are undermined by the in-ineffective limit setting and the
takings regime. This leads me to the specified topics
in the takings regime. Selected matters of national
importance from the RMA have been isolated into this category,
and protections of them completely undermined by the requirements of the
takings regime. Takings provisions arise from property rights
as an economic interest of those with access to or power
over resources. The right to do what you like on your own land
came from the now obsolete notion of the lords of the manor, who
nevertheless owed their estates and property rights to the favor of the
monarch. Controls on property rights have long been absorbed into
planning, and planning controls restricting development rights
protect others or the environment from adverse effect generated
by developments. But rights are social
constructs, as are planning controls, and all interests
need to be considered. Property rights in these bills are
one-sided. They may not coincide with the public
interest, yet there's no corresponding requirement to provide
compensation to those adversely affected by development
or the environment. It's no longer
acceptable to consider ownership of the commons, such as
outstanding natural landscapes or biodiversity.
The property rights lobby is a small but highly vocal part of
this community, which has coalesced around ONMLs and
SNAs. There is a lot of noise about
SNAs suggesting they've been identified by illegitimate
means. This is completely false. Ecologists
agree on criteria for such an identification, and it's been used
since the nineteen seventies and most recently incorporated into the
NPS-IB and is standard in most
NPSS. RPSs, I s-should
say. So a fair process is needed to
encompass rights of all parties, and this cannot occur if both
individual and community voices are not heard through public
participation, which these bills severely
constrain. Notification arises from goals in both
bills that relate to externalities and the public
interest. But limited-- limiting participation to
qualifying residents unfairly discriminates against
organizations that might be active in the locality but have no
physical address there, and this ignores that there-- nowadays
there's electronic communication.
Many people find the planning process difficult and rely on
national or regional advocacy groups to advance their views and protect their
interests. Actions by our government to shut out
participation and the voices of its citizens are
disrespecting democracy and should be vehemently
resisted. NGOs must be recognized and given
standing. And affected parties have rights-- have property
rights too, and I think this is important to
remember. As part of my master's thesis, I viewed planning
applications and interviewed people who were considered affected
parties. Sometimes people were-- who were affected parties
were not, treated as such. The poor imbalance-- the
power imbalance between residents who were enjoying the use of their
land and those seeking to change the land use around them,
mostly using professionals to advance those developments, was strongly
evident. I found that resource consent conditions that could
or would have avoided or mitigated adverse effects on people were not
imposed. Basic things such as building a fence,
landscaping, noise and activity controls, location of facilities, or
widening of access ways. Even when these mitigations were
included in consents, often they were not implemented or otherwise done
in a way that didn't meet the needs of the affected party.
I found instances where affected parties had given written agreement, but the
decision allowed changes such that the person would not have given
agreement, or the application that was lodged was different to what the
person had given approval for. One example was
a large residential subdivision, which was
a Christian camp with, various facilities, including
a prayer room, suggested, became
accommodation for a hundred and ten seasonal workers working different
shifts and throwing liquor bottles over the fence.
And there were different sets-- more than one set of plans on the council
file.
And so what became-- what was a Christian camp
became a permanent residential development
intensively. Affected parties should be provided with the
application when lodged, and then they would know that their written approval
still applies. And draft conditions should also be sent to persons
who've given written approval to, to confirm their approval still
stands. Otherwise, affected parties' rights are
un-unfairly restrained. And these are property rights
as well.My research found councils
did not protect the interests of rate payers contrary to their
expectations, and without legal support, affected parties could not
achieve concessions or design improvements from
developers. Approving business uses in
residential areas or adjacent to lifestyle blocks is particularly
problematic. Existing uses frequently expand and
create considerably more adverse effects on affected parties
than was initially anticipated. For example, offices with no
weekend operations became a car yard, and a bed and breakfast
became a function center in a residential area.
So reverse sensity- sensitivity provisions in rural
areas should not allow existing uses with serious adverse
effects to continue indefinitely without any mitigation or
minimizing of effects through a review of conditions.
I'll pause there, Madam Chair.
Yes. No, thank you very much, Linda, for that submission.
Look, we've got a couple of questions. We'll go first to Priyanka.
Thank you. Um, thanks for your written and oral submissions,
Linda. I just, had a question, about a point that you
make in your written submission around the consistency of setting
environmental limits. Um, you've mentioned
that the fact that ecosystem health limits
need to be set by regional councils in their national enviro-
environment plan is likely to lead to inconsistency across the
country. Um, and you've, a- and you've mentioned that you would
recommend that the national framework, for
ecosystem health, health as in the NPSFM should be carried
over. To this, you've also talked about, the setting of
the methodology that should be done by the minister and,
that it should instead be handed over to experts.
I wondered if you could, just expand on that a little
bit, particularly around the importance of the national
framework, when it comes to consistency
versus methodology.
Um, yes, sure. Um, I think the only way you can get
consistency is to have a national approach as, for
example, the NPS, i- all of the NPSs
really. Um, and
you need to apply expertise in the
developing of those national,
standards or whatever you want, provisions, whatever you want to call them.
Uh, I think, yeah, if, if, if e-
if regional councils are setting ecosystem health
standards, you're gonna get different standards right throughout the country, and
I, quite honestly, I don't think that, there are
such differences in ecosystem,
health throughout New Zealand that you would have different standards in
different parts of the country. And as you
have in this, these bills at the moment, use provisions that allow
for, councils to put in different provisions that are
not come from the national pr- framework, provided they can h-
provide a justification. So if that, if that part of
the, the bills is retained, then there is a process there
for, regions to have slightly different
standards if they feel they've got different,
needs
according to their particular environments.
Thank you. Um, one of the, one of the
concerns that has been raised by other submitters is the
potential for offsetting or the reliance on offsetting when it comes
to, achieving the goal of no net loss of
indigenous biodiversity. Would you, would you say that having
nationally cons- a nationally consistent framework would,
would go somewhere to addressing that as well?
Yeah, off- offsetting's very problematic.
Um, there are some really good sta- principles
for offsetting, and I think that they are in an appendix
to the NPS-IB. Um, offsetting
doesn't always work. It's a really,
complicated thing, and if you're dealing with something
that's pr- a threatened species, or
a very rare ecosystem type,
to... O- offsetting doesn't always provide what you
need to get the outcome that you want.
And there aren't very many good examples around the world
really of where offsetting has really
worked. It, it's, it can be, it can be
considered, but it, it can't provide
for all situations.
Look, thank you very much, Linda. We are gonna have to leave it there.
We've gone, well over time, but we appreciate your time and
insights today, so thank you.
Thank you. Thanks to all the committee. Thank you.
So we're now moving through to our next submitter, Jocelyne
Paprill.
Welcome, Jocelyne, to the select committee this
morning. You have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand it over to
you to talk us through our submission. Thank you.
Okay. Tēnā koutou. Ngā mihi kia koutou.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for the opportunity to share my concerns with
you. I'm submitting as an individual who has a keen
interest and involvement in our natural and urban environments.
I am active in conservation, volunteering for a number of restoration projects
in and around Christchurch. I am also a trustee of two
environmental charitable organizations, Christchurch EnviroHub and Blue
Cradle Foundation. Over my career as an
educator, I have been a passionate advocate
of the environmental commons and for good urban planning, which has
community at its heart.I spent a year on a teacher fellowship
investigating urban sustainability with a comparative focus on
Waitākere and Christchurch. As I stated in
my written submission, I have concerns regarding both bills, but acknowledge
that there are positive elements within each.
I also recognise that the RMA in 1991 needed a
thorough review and updating from its original form.
The regular fiddling with parts of the act in terms of amendments
means it became a cumbersome piece of legislation that had enabled
de-degradation of our natural environment rather
than i-its protection. Development that is
mindful of nature requires time. It requires all
different perspectives to be heard for all possible
consequences, including unintended consequences of a
development on not only the natural world, but also on human health and
wellbeing to be considered. The natural world and humanity
are intrinsically entwined, and as nature cannot speak
for itself, we must ensure space and time is given for those
of us who are drawn to speak for nature.
As we plan our towns, cities and infrastructure, we must be mindful of the
needs of the natural world, as well as the future needs of those who come
after us. This is the road the RMA 1991
set us on, out on, thinking about sustainability,
incorporating long-term thinking and reciprocity into how we live on
this land. The RMA recognised
interdependence and valued diverse perspectives through public
participation resource consent process.
I thought the introduction in 2023 of the Natural and Built
Environment Act provided a simplified planning structure with a principle at
its heart that I could applaud. Namely, the recognition captured in the
concept of Te Oranga O Te Taiao, that the health and
wellbeing of the environment underpins our very existence, and
indeed must be recognised for its intrinsic value
alone. I'm saddened that in the current-- their current
form, these bills prioritize economic concerns, with
environmental protection as a secondary consideration.
Surely with what we now understand, the reality is that we can't
balance environmental outcomes with economic
development. It seems under these two bills, we will be returning
our country to the pre-1990s Wild West of
planning, where adverse effects of development on the natural environment were
rarely considered. At least the 2023 Natural
and Built Environment Act recognized that economic to-- activity and development
are reliant on a healthy environment where biodiversity, resources, and
taonga are protected.
Such principles have seemingly been abandoned in favor of unlocking
development capacity, delivering infrastructure, and enabling
primary sector growth. I therefore cannot support the bills in their
current form. I will address in turn the five
aspects I'm most concerned about.
One, goals and limits. The bill's goals are weaker than
Section six and seven of the RMA, which recognize the importance of things like
intrinsic values, environmental enhancement, the protection of
areas of significant habitat of indigenous fauna,
fauna and kaitiakitanga or stewardship.
The limits reflect minimum acceptable outcomes, the
mere capacity to support life. This is
detrimental to the need for strong environmental bottom lines.
As I wrote in my submission, a development could be effectively allowed without
a thorough understanding as to whether the environment can sustain
it. A healthy and robust natural environment protects the health and
wellbeing of ecosystems in our communities.
Ka ora te whenua, ka ora te tangata.
Healthy land, healthy people. As an environmental educator, I've
seen firsthand the degradation of our freshwater environments, particularly the
lowland rivers of Canterbury. In the last fifteen years,
Cove-Fort on the Selwyn River has become less healthy and life-supporting, with
more regular algae blooms.
We need goals that provide clear direction for environmental improvement, rather
than just achieve no net indig-loss in indigenous
biodiversity. Trade-offs such as this could enable the destruction of
rich, healthy biodiversity for lesser valued biodiversity in other
a- as, as has been canvassed by the previous speaker.
I support the establishment of robust environmental limits at national
level, which cannot be weakened by council.
Secondly, climate change imperatives.
We're experiencing a climate emergency.
We see it in climate-related disasters various communities have experienced over
the last few years. These bills do not integrate with our
twenty-fifty target or emissions reduction plans.
The bills must help our country to mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate
change in a safe and timely manner.
These bills have the power to influence where and how we develop land for
housing, build more highways, or whether we continue to mine for
gold. Yet the bills deliberately exclude these activities' impacts on the
climate, which to me is unbelievable.
As a country, we should be looking to the future, problem-solving using
natural-based solutions, rather than leaving it to last-minute ad
hoc decisions or the policies of insurance companies determine how we
respond to sea level rise or the impacts of severe
storm. I recommend that the bills be changed to place
climate impacts at the center of planning and
decision-making. Thirdly, Te Tiriti o
Waitangi. The bill's narrow approach to Te Tiriti does not uphold the
Crown's obligations under the treaty.
The bills must be changed to meaningfully provide for partnership, active
protection, rangatiratanga, and the exercise of
kaitiakitanga. Over time, I've-- and I've seen it, Māori
have fought hard for their relationship with their ancestral lands,
water, wahi tapu, and other taonga to be recognized.
Their knowledge and connections have been crucial for protecting significant
environmental values. Many iwi and hapū have developed
practices, relationships, and expertise under the current Resource Management
Act. It appalls me that these new bills seek to wind the clock
back-To reduce Māori involvement to an outdated and tokenistic
consultation role. So therefore, I support iwi and
hapū having strong decision-making roles within their resource management
system as kaitiaki of Aotearoa. I also see
fourthly, there's insufficient sup- scope for public participation.
A robust democracy provides for inclusive decision-making processes.
These bills do not sufficiently value public participation.
It's a fundamental right within our democratic system, people and communities must
be enabled to contribute to policy and plans that affect them and the natural
environment, no matter whether they live in the area of concern or
not. I value the work of watchdogs and NGOs
who operate at a national level, but are concerned about environmental outcomes
that affect everyone. I come back to the idea of the commons.
We can't leave the protection of our commons to a government minister or couple
of ministers. I also fear that these bills seek to weaken the
vital supervisory role of the Environment
Court. I therefore recommend the opportunities for
people to participate in local plans be enhanced, and hearings and
appeals to Environment Court are essential.
I also recommend that independent boards of inquiry should prepare national
policies and standards. My final one, the
concept of regulatory relief, and I see this as the most dangerous
aspect of the proposed bills, and it's deeply concerning.
I'm opposed to the introduction of the concept of regulatory relief for private
landowners, where council seeks to adopt environmental regulations or
controls. It prioritises one
individual's or an organisation's right to use a resource over the
rights of potentially a whole community to access and use this
resource. A glaring example of this is the ability of
dairy producers in parts of Canterbury to use and pollute water in ways that
blocks the right of whole communities to safe water.
It also prioritises the right of existing individual organisations
ahead of the rights of future generations to access the
ecosystem services provided by a resource.
It may also potentially compromise local government decision-making, as they may be
reluctant to make decisions that prioritise the protection of indigenous
biodiversity or outstanding natural landscapes, where they may be
forced to compensate a landowner.
They will prioritise the potential cost to their rating base rather than the
long-term cost of environmental degradation and harm.
Nature has intrinsic rights. From my perspective, we're all on this planet
together, and a landowner or business should not be compensated for
not doing something that may impact poorly on the natural
environment. We must prioritise protection of the environment.
Nature must have a legal right to thrive.
I therefore recommend that Part 4 of Schedule 3 of Clause 92 of
the Planning Board Bill, Clause 111 of the Natural
Environment Bill be removed. That Clause 122 of the
Natural Environment Bill needs to be changed so that relief cannot be provided
for any land use restriction that control impacts on
common good resources.
The threshold of severe impairment needs to be changed to one where land is
rendered incapable of reasonable use.
A general polluter pay principle should be introduced to the Natural
Environment Bill to recognise the externalities associated-
Look, Jocelyn, we're just, we've gone over time there, so we are
gonna have to leave it there because we do have other submitters
waiting, and we do have an agenda to stick to.
But look, we really appreciate your submission.
We appreciate your, passion for this and obviously
all your conservation efforts as well.
So thank you very much, Jocelyn.
Yeah. A pleasure. Thank you.
So we now move on to our next submitter today,
Suzanne
Hills.
Yes. Good morning, everyone. Can you hear me okay?
Yes, we can, Suzanne. Welcome to the select committee.
We just can't see you at this point, if you just wanna pop your video on
there.
Yes, there I am. Thank you.
Oh, there we go. We can see you, Suzanne. Welcome to the select committee.
You've got 10 minutes with us, so take your submission as read, and we'll hand it
over to you for-
Yes
... your opening remarks.
Kia ora. Thank you. I live, on the West Coast amongst abundant
nature compared to many other places in Aotearoa, in Te
Waipounamu, and this is what motivates me to speak to
you today, and I thank you for the opportunity.
So overall, my comment is after reading the bills, attending seminars
on them, and reading the submissions of EDS and Forest &
Bird, I'm left with the impression that much of the
Natural Environment Bill is a facade.
So the explanatory note has been written to appear
as legislation that lo- that will look after the environment.
But read past that explanatory note, and it's very
leaky, and it risks not meeting its stated purpose of a
framework for the use, protection, and enhancement of the natural
environment. So take the phrase "enhancement of the
natural environment". Clearly, that's where we need to be to have a
chance of a sustainable future, and it's encouraging to see the
wording filters down into the purpose of regional plans and
responsibilities of regional councils.
But then it butts up against several walls.
So the first wall is that enhancement is not a requirement
in setting environmental limits.
In an age, in an age of significant and accelerating
environmental degradation, environmental limits should be set at a
level that protects and heals, not a limit that
potentially takes ecosystem health to the wire or
beyond.Um, and also one of the Natural
Environment Bill goals states no net loss of
indigenous biodiversity, and that does not reconcile with
enhancement. So it should be net gain.
And no net loss won't protect specific ecosystems.
An example here on the West Coast is the unique coal measure habitats
of the Denniston Plateau, which is under im-imminent threat from coal
mining destruction. So simplistic no net loss could be
achieved through financial compensation to DOC for
investment in another place like the Heathie, which has happened.
So Denniston and its unique ecosystem with its specialist plants and animals
is lost, while the Heathie thrives.
No net loss, but we've still lost.
And it's not at all clear that greenhouse gas emissions can be
considered under the National Environment Bill.
Yet if it's not aligned with the Zero Carbon Act by including
emissions, emission reduction plans and emission budgets into the
framework, and that's, including it from
national policies down to permits, then we won't be protecting and
enhancing the natural environment, and we are heading for social,
political and economic turmoil. At a recent
resource consent hearing, the community group I'm part of had to
push very hard to get commissioners to even consider greenhouse
gas emissions, which are now permitted under the RMA.
And if it wasn't for our group, we wouldn't have seen an emissions report be
required from the applicant, which then resulted in the commissioners
agreeing with us and including a consent condition to eliminate the
largest source of emissions. Which, by the way,
may all go by the wayside because the development is one of the West Coast
four listed fast track projects. So it is absolutely
essential that greenhouse gas emissions are part of the mix
in the National Environment Bill and can be considered as an environmental
effect.
I have three further points to make which relate to the small
population of the West Coast, at less than thirty-five
thousand people, and we live in a large geographical area, the
majority of which is either public conservation land or native
vegetation on private land. So the first point is the transition
time is way too short. So the past few years has seen the
development of a combined regional plan on the West Coast, known
as the TTPP, the Te Tai Patini Plan, which to
date has cost ten point three million and is presently under
appeal from about forty-five appellants covering about two-thirds of the
plan. So by the time the TTPP emerges out the other
side of mediation and possibly the Environment Court, the region will have to
notify a new regional plan under this new act because the
transition period is so short. So from my reading, regional
plans have to be notified within two years of Royal Assent.
And while I appreciate that the TTPP will form the basis of the new
regional plan, much of it will still need to be overhauled to make it
consistent with the new act. So that's further financial
and participation burden on a very small population
base. So there should be some scope for a longer transitional period,
particularly in this situation where a new combined plan under the RMA is
about to go into the expensive mediation process and then is
on the cusp of becoming operative.
So hundreds of West Coast people submitted on the TTPP and some of those
stuck through the arduous hearing process, and those people will be
utterly fed up if the TTPP hardly sees the light of day
before it has to be significantly updated.
Second point is regulatory relief is unworkable, it's unaffordable, and
it's daft. It is particularly unfair for a region with a small
population and with so much of the natural environment still intact.
The most likely consequence of regulatory relief will be the ecosystem
health limits to be set by the West Coast Regional
Council may not be robust and instead be watered down to
invo- to avoid claims of financial compensation or rates
relief by landowners and to avoid expensive legal
action. We are all both collectively and individually
responsible for our life-giving natural environment, and that regulatory
relief ref- reinforces entitlement and personal gain
rather than community common good and social
profit. Next point is the Natural Environment
Bill essentially restricts public participation to those living in the
region. So again, with a small population and a vast natural
environment, who stands up and robustly defends nature?
Well, it's certainly not the West Coast councils.
Speaking up for nature has largely been Forest and Bird, and they have
invested considerable resources into protecting the natural environment through
participating in the public processes.
They have prevented some of the most damaging developments, including an opencast
coal mine in Westport's water reserve on the mountain of Takuha.
So NGOs bring a nature perspective to the decision-making table backed
up by expert evidence and planning and legal
expertise. They represent hundreds of thousands of New
Zealanders, and to exclude NGOs is deliberate
dismantling of our democracy. Cut out Forest and Bird's input on the
West Coast and it will be left to a handful of individuals who have the
time, the patience and the tenacity to speak out
publicly. And no matter how passionate they may be, they cannot
match the expertise and resources of
NGOs. So to finish, the natural environment and the
climate is under so much accumulated pressure that we have now reached
the point where we have our last chance to build a sustainable
future. And the bills as they stand could well be one of the nails
in the coffin for sustainability.
So it is in the hands of all MPs to work together to get this
legislation right, to actually achieve the stated purpose
of a framework for the use, protection and enhancement of the
natural environment. Kia ora.
Kia ora, Suzanne. Uh, look, we've got time for just one quick question, and
we'll take it from Lann Farm.
Sure. Kia ora
Kia ora koe, Susan. Kia ora. Thank you so much for your submission
today. I just wanted to ask, you
know, you're painting, I guess, a very clear
picture about the implications if these bills are to go ahead
unchanged, especially for the environment.
And I wanted to, ask you particularly
about the fact that fast tr- you know, we've sort of got
this system that will not protect the environment, but then we've
potentially got fast track approval projects
coming in on top of this system as
well. Do you think that's a sort of general fairness and equity issue
for existing users, say, in the water space,
where they might actually have their rights taken from them from developments
coming on over the top?
Yeah. Well, fa- I mean, fast track is completely outside of the
system, right? This, environmental protection system.
There might be, there might be some reference to the FastTrack
Act in these new bills, but it's, y- you know, it's very
superficial. I mean, the fast track just overrides everything.
So we're putting all this work and effort into this,
system of protecting the environment, through these new
bills, which are highly problematic in themselves, and we still
have the FastTrack Act which, operates completely
outside of that. I mean, we have, y- you know, with the fast
track, for example, we have projects on public conservation land
where DOC is no longer the decision maker and,
and, and we have a purpose in the FastTrack Act, which
is, is, is completely different,
to, to what the Conservation Act is trying to achieve.
So poor DOC, you know, they're no lo- no longer the decision
maker for public conservation land and, and uphold the
principles of the Conservation Act.
So the f- the FastTrack Act is, it is just a, a, a monster
that's been released.
Look, thank you very much, Suzanne. We will have to leave it there.
But we, appreciate your insights all the way from the West Coast,
a very beautiful part of the country. So thank you.
Yeah, for sure. Kia ora. Thank you.
So we now move to our next submitter, who was
just with us and is still with us. There we go.
Diane, welcome to the select committee.
You've got 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Hi. Hi, can you hear me?
Yes, we can.
Oh, good. Thanks. Um, yes, the RMA needed
reform, but sometimes I think, reversing to past
systems that worked, like the local catchment boards, is the way
forward and could be less expensive and more effective.
Local community agreement and involvement means less need for compliance
officers, and compliance can become a self-perpetuating
industry with armies of iPad carrying foot soldiers,
people with degrees but no real world experience.
An example of this at the local level was a situation in Christchurch,
where a traffic planner engineer decided to change a corner for safety
reasons. Brought in consultants, paid lots of money for the
design that no one liked, which had to be changed, costing more money.
And although a few elected members visited the site, the traffic planner
engineer or the consultants never ever
visited the site to experience what the issues actually
were. The end result is a lot of money was wasted on a corner that
had non-iner- injury or low injury accidents, and the new
design slows traffic on the main roads, which then compels drivers to
seek alternate routes on narrow residential
streets. So remote central planning never
works, but I'm not against some
central standards. But,
anyway, there has to be the strong local input
there.
So farmers are often maligned, but I think they take better care of pests
on their land than DOC takes care of pests on public land.
An example of cooperation of farmers and community is the Easter
Bunny competition. And North Canterbury, they've included feral cats into
the competition. Um, so it's great community
involvement. There's excellent work also being done in Taranaki, which I
just visited recently, where,
centered around Lake Rotokare, they are trapping,
there's intensive trapping of small predators, rats, et cetera, with
residents, both farmers and townies participating in setting, setting
and monitoring traps, mostly on farmland.
So, also one of the biggest pests, in my opinion, are pine
trees. Eradicating pine trees is a never ending
job, and the larger poison trees are left standing, waiting
for a spark to start a massive fire.
In Canada, the pine beetle killed off large areas of pine trees, and the
fire service begged the government to fell the dead trees, which
they didn't do because of cost. These trees then became the
fuel for the massive fires a few years back, but which was more
costly, removing the trees or the fire?
So something that I feel that needs addressing that I didn't
put in my written, submission was,
the very real but unseen world of electromagnetic
frequencies and radio frequencies.
Migratory birds and bees use the, use the earth's natural
magnetic frequencies to find their way, and are having difficulty doing
this with the ever-increasing wireless use of technology
jamming their senses. With the rollout of newer wireless
5G tech without consultation, and no long-term studies
being conducted on safety to humans, only industry
telling us that we want it and that it's safe-Yeah, right, I'm gonna
trust industry on this one. We protect ourselves
from X-rays, and yet use earbuds, bringing these frequencies in
close proximity to our brain. Or do the frequencies go
through the brain from one bud to the other? Who knows?
How does this f- affect our mental health, our cancer rates?
Some want to ban under 16s from social media, recognizing the
harm from addiction to devices. Teenagers will
soon find a way around a ban, but do you want to increase the harm caused
by unknown radiation risks? Do we want to encourage device use
through faster dopamine hits? Do we really need
our downloads to be that tiny bit faster?
The international guidelines from the ICNIRP are just
that, guidelines. Who set the guidelines?
Was it industry involved? Did money change hands?
New Zealand has turned them into standards.
Other countries that use these guidelines also have exclusion
zones. For example, in the UK, allowable cell tower and small
cell distance from inhabited buildings is no closer than
five meters, with 305 meters
recommended. In New Zealand, people have cell towers right next
to their fence and feet from bedrooms.
No consultation. Industry gets what industry
wants. In this case, it was Spark. I'm not being
anti-technology, but for safer technology.
The position of international groups like Physicians for Safe Technology needs to
be taken into consideration. I also recommend that you read all the
safety warnings in very fine print next time you buy a new phone.
This is a massive subject that needs truly independent scientific
review, not from scientists part of the industry.
And the last point is, I want to clarify my s- position in my
written, submission about Ngāi Tahu
iwi multi-billion dollar corporation, and separate
it from the hapū and individual Ngāi Tahu members, who can disagree with the
corporation, as they have done with the Green Park huts
decision. Ngāi Tahu Corporation has a vast real estate
portfolio with a questionable environmental record, both social and
physical environment, and therefore, there is a massive conflict of interest in
consulting with them on property issues.
So, I mean, I have examples of these if you want them, and I just wanted to leave
room for questions.
Yeah, look, thank you very much, Diane.
Um, that was a very passionate submission.
Look, I've just got a question. Um, you mentioned,
predator control. Um, I was just wondering whether you could just
elaborate a little bit further on that, as to how you
feel the, the bills in their current state, would,
affect that, because that's something you obviously talked about,
public, private land, and DOC's involvement as
well.
I can't recall right now all the details that are in the bill itself,
but I've heard from farmers that I know and
from podcasts and so on that farmers have cleared their land of
pests, and that the pests, like pigs and deer and so
on, come in from DOC land, and they've offered to hunt on DOC land,
but they're not allowed to hunt in DOC land.
And I did hear some submissions earlier in the, I think it was a week
ago, there was a lot of hunters talking, and about this point, about not being
allowed to hunt on DOC land. But,
yeah, so besides the trapping
and,
the Easter Bunny shoot, and now the, the feral cat shoot as
well, um...
O- okay. No, thank you, Diane. And you also made some very passionate points in
your submission around freshwater farm plans.
Uh, you had some quite strong views on those.
Well, yes, we want to have clean
water. That's right. And,
but the thing is, for some farms, that might not be such an issue.
Maybe they should focus their
efforts and their money and their time and everything on, like, control
of wallabies, which is a regional thing down in Waimate and, and
southern Canterbury, or possums or other pests
rather than, I mean, maybe the water isn't an issue on their land, so for
all small, or f- what was it, farms over 50
hectares have to do this freshwater farm plan.
So it's tying our farmers up to do something which
they should be better focused on other aspects of their
environment.
Look, thank you very much, Diane, for your time today.
We appreciate your submission and coming before us, so thank
you.
Well, thank you for giving me the time.
Brilliant, thank you. Look, we, now move on to our next submitter,
who is a familiar face, and, who has obviously sat
on this committee before. Uh, Eugenie Sage, welcome to the select
committee this morning. Look, you know the drill.
You've got 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to
you. Oh, you're on mute there,
Eugenie. You just need to put your audio on. Brilliant.
Think I'd know how to do that by now . Thank you, Madam Chair.
Tena koutou katoa, nga mihi nui kia koutou.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
But, Madam Chair and members, I am frustrated at having to submit
on these bills, because the Natural and Built Environment and Spatial
Planning Acts 2023 were much better replacements for the
RMA. The integrated purpose of Te Oranga o te Taiao
promoted a reciprocal relationship with nature.
It better implemented the treaty.
It provided for effective public participation, long-term
strategic spatial planning, and a much more efficient and less costly
system.And really frustrated because of the very comprehensive and
thoughtful policy work, and the considerable agency,
parliamentary, and public time and effort which inter- went into that
legislation, and which has been largely wasted, in comparison with
the haste that this legislation's been developed.
So I suggest that the select committee delay the report back until
2027, and it use the NBEA and
SPA as a basis for a major rewrite and to build
cross-party agreement on key principles and
provisions so that we get that stability and certainty in
our resource management system and have law that endures.
Couple of key points. I oppose the two separate regimes for managing
air, water, and the coastal marine area and land use development.
Nature is interconnected, not compartmentalized.
How land is used affects waterways, for example, and there's no evidence to
support the siloed approach, and MFE says it's likely to make the system more
complex and costly. There is no overarching
commitment to implement Te Tiriti or any provisions comparable
to Section 8 of the RMA, and the bill's narrow approach
only allows consultation, with Maori.
The bills need amending to meaningfully provide for partnership,
active protection, rangatiratanga, and the exercise of
kaitiakitanga, including recognition of mata-
mataranga Maori and the whakapapa relationships with Maori
have with te taiao. And Te Oranga o te Taiao, the purpose of the
previous legislation, did that. Secondly,
oppose the weakening of environmental safeguards by prioritizing
economic development. The bills need much stronger purpose
clauses to guide implementation.
The purpose and goals should recognize that humans are part of
nature, and we have a duty to care for it, just as the environment
sustains and supports us. And again, Te Oranga o te Taiao
did this. It recognized that the economy is a subset of the
environment, not the other way around, and that if we put nature first, we
sustain our own wellbeing. We face the twin crises
of biodiversity loss and climate instability, which is
accelerating. The bills don't address either of these
adequately. There's no equivalent posi- provision to
Section 6of the RMA to recognize and
protect significant indigenous vegetation and significant habitats for
indigenous fauna. Prioritizing SNAs and
protecting them is essential to maintain
biodiversity.
Sorry, just dealing with a call. Without a new overarching statutory goal
in the planning bill to protect SNAs, there is nothing
to drive natural policy to direct how they should be identified and
protected, and it's very difficult to set environmental limits for
biodiversity. Under the RMA, identifying
SNAs and requiring a resource consent for activities likely to
degrade or destroy them has been a de facto limit.
It's been a tool to try and limit, further biodiversity
loss. The no net loss in biodiversity in Clause
11 of the Natural Environment Bill is problematic.
It normalizes the continued degradation of nature, especially
as the bills shift from the RMA approach that adverse effects must be
avoided, remedied or mitigated to
avoiding, minimized or remedied where
practical, or offset or compensated for where
appropriate. Terms like minimize are undefined and
uncertain, giving scope for degradation and
litigation. No net loss is very difficult to
assess. It appears intended to apply at a national level, so
that would allow for loss at a district or regional level and compensation to
occur elsewhere. And allowing for offsetting and compensation
without the detailed guidance which the Natural Built Environment
Act provided for the use of these tools, risks
normalizing damage to significant natural areas and sites
rather than prioritizing genuine, gen- genuine avoidance and
remediation. And under the RMA, the functions of
territorial authorities included the maintenance of indigenous
biodiversity, and regional councils had a similar respon-
responsibility for, in their planning role, for maintaining
indigenous biodi- biological diversity.
There are no equivalent provisions in these bills which require this of
council, so that risks neglect. The new regulatory relief
pro- provisions compound the biodiversity loss problem by discouraging
plan rules for biodiversity protection, as my submission outlines.
And I think, Madam Chair, I'll leave it there to allow questions.
I had a lot more to say on climate and public participation, but that's been
put in the submission. Thank you.
Look, thank you, Eugenie. I will pass over to Lan Pham,
who has the first question.
Tēnā koe Eugenie. Thank you so much for your submission
and, yeah, the thought and work that's gone into this space over many
years. Um, my question was around,
something that's come up consistently with submitters, and that
is the ministerial direction and the amount of
it. And one thing that has been brought up by others
but that you actually mention in your submission as well is this potential to
use board of inquiry processes to get out of that
ministerial flip-flop that pe- people are worried about.
Um, can you expand on why you think that would be valuable?
Thanks for the question. 'Cause they're very broad ministerial powers, there's
provision for, I think it's a technical advisory group, but that's a
closed process, only advising the minister.
Where you've got a board of inquiry which hears and considers public
submissions, that's a check and a balance on ministerial
power. It makes recommendations to the minister, and it's
obvious if the minister deviates from that.It provides
transparency, it provides, a better opportunity for public
participation, and it reduces the risk
to ministers of being accused of cronyism and
influence by corporate and other interests.
Because if there's no independent body making
recommendations, corporate interests can go direct to the minister, and perhaps
that could be, in res- sort of asking for policy change as a
result of donations to political parties.
So a board of inquiry protects ministers by providing that
independent, recommendatory advice and doing the work of hearing public
submissions. And it's been taken out, previously, and I
think it does need to be reinstated.
Kia ora.
Thank you. And now we'll go to Grant McCallum.
Yeah. Hi, Eugenie. Um-
Kia ora, Grant
... thank you for your submission.
You know, I'm just curious 'cause y- you highlight- you focused on the
biodiversity, which is great.
Mm.
And I'm sure you're very aware of the, the, the work done by a farming community in
particular-
Mm
... with QEII Trust and other landowners.
I think it's k- I think it's effectively the second-biggest national park in the
country if you add it all up. And you s-
No, it doesn't have the protections which national parks have
Well, yeah, yeah. It effectively creates a lot of new biodiver- protected
biodiversity around the country, which is great.
Now, the-- and, and that's done on a voluntary basis, yet
you, and you, you, you have real concerns around the regulatory relief where
you get something like the SNA situation that blew up in Northland,
on the... a, a couple of years ago, and that led to
a real pushback from the community and because it was, it was literally taking
away people's opportunity to earn as much money, lowering their land values, and
that sort of thing. Surely that was a highlight of why we've got to
have, make a, a real focus on where it's
appropriate, if a community values that,
biodiversity or whatever is significant to them that much that they get
compensation for it.
Well, I think as my submission noted, the voluntary approach hasn't
worked. We've got a biodiversity crisis in Aotearoa, with 4,000 species
threatened or at risk of extinction.
We are a biodiversity hotspot because of our level of endemism.
I've been involved with SNAs since the RMA started.
Mm.
Um, and I think there's been a lot of misinformation, and, as there were,
was in Northland. They do not prevent people
using land. It just ensures that a resource consent is required for
activities which degrade or destroy, the values in them.
And there's been huge destruction of biodiversity, but no
compensation to the public for the loss of this common heritage.
So the regulatory relief provisions impose extra costs on
councils. They, there's no guidance as
to how they should be done, so that's gonna lead to inconsistency around the
country, and it will have, as many submitters have said, a chilling
effect on plan provisions which provide,
some protection.
Mm. Thank you.
So there hasn't been any, compensation to the public for the loss of
biodiversity, and yet these provisions are seeking to.
Mm.
And also Section 87 of the RMA already protects
property rights and requires the Environment Court, if there's a
unreasonable burden, unfair and unreasonable burden, or
it makes land incapable of reasonable use, Section 85
actually, that already protects private property rights.
We don't need this regulatory relief stuff.
Mm. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, and we'll take one quick last question from Steve
Abel.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, Eugenie, I wonder if you can expand on the risk
of, the, you know, court action
with that, right of private property rights to be
recognized when it's perceived by, someone who has
those rights that they have had them infringed upon unfairly by
regional council, and is there a risk that, councils
will now get caught up in endless
litigation?
Uh, yes. And I think each council's going to have to develop
its own framework, that imposes cost, but it is the chilling
effect and the fact that we've got a biodiversity crisis that is the,
one of the biggest problems. Uh, we need healthy
nature to sustain us-
Mm
... and this regulatory relief will, I think, compromise
significantly council's ability to just ensure that people apply for a
resource consent if they're going to drain a wetland or clear vegetation
which is habitat for significant species.
And there's no protection in the bill for wildlife either.
So that's why you need that provision around, SNAs as well.
Kia ora.
Brilliant.
Thank you for the time to make a submission.
Kia ora. Thank you very much, Eugenie.
We do appreciate your time, and appreciate your very thorough submission as
well, so some valuable considerations.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
So we now move to our next submitter, Andy
Mitchell. And we can see you there, Andy.
Kia ora, Chair.
Welcome to the select committee. We will hand it over to you.
You have 10 minutes with us, but do take your submission as read, and then we'll
open up for questions.
Thank you, Chair. Um,
just to know, I, I'm sure there've been some very comprehensive submissions on this
very comprehensive legislation, so I've focused in on one part of it, which is the
protection of various values and characteristics for the public good.
That's been a key feature of the RMA since it was first adopted in
1991, and clearly it's well-intended, but in reality
it's something that has frequently placed councils in conflict, with their
communities and with landowners.
And as a country, we've made limited progress on many fronts.
After 35 years, there are some councils which have protected no
significant natural areas, some have protected no heritage
buildings, no notable trees, or no sites and areas of significance to
Māori. And my local council is guilty of some of that, and I've
explained some of the issues they've had, in my
submission. So I think the, first
point I'd li- like to make is that, legislative protections have to be
well-defined, so councils can implement them,
without, contesting with their community what is
intended. I've noted there, um-Hutt City
Council's, trouble with significant natural areas.
And as a resident, I look through the layers of, regulation and
legislation, and, the protection of areas of significant
indigenous vegetation was a requirement of the RMA, but
there was no clear definition in there of what significance was.
There was no clear defin- definition in the Greater Wellington's Regional
Council's regional plan of what significance was, or in Hutt City Council's
own district plan, of what significance was.
So you ended up with a council arguing with members of its community about what
the legislation intended. The national policy statement for
indigenous biodiversity was an, from what I've seen, the government's best
attempt at this, but it was promptly suspended by the current
government.
So the national instruments provided for in the bill will be
critical. They must provide clear guidelines and assessment
criteria for each of the protections required under the Planning Act and the
Natural Environment Bill. Uh, my
second point is that councils aren't necessarily the best people to do all of this
work. Independent expert agencies are best placed to define and apply
protections, not councils. Under the RMA, much of the responsibility
for defining, applying, and defending legislative protections has
fallen onto councils. Councils don't and can't be expected to
hold expertise in all of these areas.
Just noting too, other local government reform, redefining
core services of local government, and certainly things like, heritage
architecture and notable tree assessment are not considered core services
of council under that reform.
Uh, the expert advisory group on resource management,
reform made a great suggestion, in my opinion, to put the
identification of historic heritage, for example, into the hands of Heritage New
Zealand as an independent agency with recognized
expertise in these matters, and I've noted some other
organizations who could do similar on different topics.
Um, handing those protections over to independent expert agencies promotes
several important outcomes for protections.
One, it achieves accuracy and consistency across councils and across the
country. Uh, secondly, reduces the cost to councils as
well. So I support that recommendation from the EAG to
put those matters into the hands of experts, or at least those same experts should
have a role in providing the clear guidelines and assessment
criteria, that I've called for above.
Uh, m- my next point is about regulatory relief, and I'm sure you've heard a lot
from councils about this. Uh, in my opinion, the whole concept of
regulatory relief is a misnomer. It's this legislation that requires
protections, so it should be described as legislative
relief. And if it's the central government that's requiring these protections,
then if there's relief to be paid, it should be paid by the central
government. Uh, finally, the regulatory
relief framework is unclear in the legislation, which will lead to
inconsistency and contestation.
Um, I've talked a bit in there too about how the bills still lack a, a clear
definition, this time around significant impact, which is what
triggers relief. And I would question, where is the def-
definition of significance? Will that be in a, in national
instruments? It needs to be defined somewhere, and preferably not
through ongoing court action, as is often the case.
Um, I feel that, and the previous spen- speaker mentioned
relief frameworks being developed by every council across the country.
I think it's another thing that actually should be standard, standardized a-
across the country, rather than, than being developed in isolation by each
council. Um, the last thing I'd like to discuss brief-
briefly is notable tree protection.
It's something I've been involved with locally.
Uh, the new bills make no mention whatsoever of the protection of notable
trees. Um, I've been informed by, MFE staff that
they will fall generically under historic heritage based on scientific
qualities. I don't know how anyone would be expected to figure that out
for themselves. It's certainly not clear in the legislation.
Um, and I would just support there the submission of the New Zealand Notable Trees
Trust, particularly their point that existing schedules of
notable and protected trees and district plans be expressly
transitioned into the new planning framework.
There should be no loss of hard-fought protections through this transition.
So I'll just leave it there and open up for questions. Kia ora.
Kia ora, Andy. Thank you very much for that submission.
Uh, look, we'll go first to Steve Abel.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Andy, for your excellent submission.
Um, on the, on the notable trees thing, I wonder if you
can reflect on the challenge that those scheduled trees under the current
regime form a tiny cohort of what-
Mm
... might be in any urban area, and to not
have even that structure of protecting the notable
trees, explicitly,
defined in this legislation,
betrays even the fact there's no talk about having general tree protection or
blanket tree protection-
Yeah
... which we did use to have up until 2012, which was w- whereby
general characteristics of trees that were large, mature,
native, important, significant, were protected
automatically. Um, I wonder if you can reflect on,
what a retreat from any sort of tree protection this current legislation
is.
Yeah, well, I think there needs to be something in there to allow for this.
Um, I did a lot of work, while our own council was taking nominations of
new notable trees, literally door knocking people, talking about the trees on their
property, and often they were surprised to learn what was in their backyard and why
it might be of significance.
Mm.
Um, certainly in Lower Hutt, we lost a lot of protection with the removal of
blanket protection, I think it was back in 2012.
Yeah.
Uh, it used to be that all of the large remnant nikau palms on the Hutt
Valley floor were protected.
Mm.
Um, now they have to be individually named in the district plan, and some of them
are, and some of them aren't. And I tried to get some more in there, did get some
more in there, but failed to get other ones across the line.
So, one thing is I think that there just needs to be a
mechanism. If it's not this, then what?
And it's the same with, significant natural areas.
So I am now a Hutt City Councillor. One of the first things
I heard from the public when I came onto our council and people clocked that I
might be an environmentalist is how could they protect their properties, their
lands now that council had failed to put through SNAs?
Mm.
So, you know, there were some people who didn't want SNAs on their property, but
there certainly were others who did, and, you know, they just need to have a
mechanism.
Brilliant. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much, Andy, for your submission today.
It appears we have no further questions. We appreciate your time.
We appreciate your submission. So thank you very much.
Thank you, Chair.
So we will now move through to our next submitter,
which is Te Korowai or Ngā Ruahine
Trust.
Aitea Korowai has canceled, and we're not able to bring Te Hunga Roia Māori
through, so-
Oh
... members take a break.
Okay. No, thank you very much for that, clerk.
So we, will resume at
11:40, and hopefully we will have Te Hunga
Roia Māori o Aotearoa by then. So, members,
we will see you
soon.